[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> There was a point where I
was in India with 30 or so other
people.
And over time I got
to hate all of them,
because I wanted to
be with Maharaji,
and they were all
taking up his time.
And I saw that they
were very adharmic,
and I couldn't stand them.
I really loathed all of them.
Maharaji kept calling me
up each day, many times,
and he'd say Ram
Dass, love everyone.
I'd say, yes, Maharaji.
And he'd say, jao, go away.
Then he'd call me up a few
minutes later, and he'd say,
Ram Dass, tell the truth.
Because he always kept catching
me at lies, social lies.
And hour after hour,
I'd get called up.
Tell the truth.
Love everyone.
Until finally the juxtaposition
of these two things
came together, and I
thought, well, the truth
is I don't love everyone.
Now what am I going to do?
He says, tell the truth,
and love everyone.
And what I usually do is I
make believe I love everyone.
I surrender the truth
a little bit, oh hello,
while I'm really
hating your guts.
Why don't I do it the
other way for a change?
So I'll grow a little bit.
So I'll tell the truth.
So I started to tell everybody
how much I hated them all.
I said Maharaji, I can't
stand any of those people.
I hate them all.
And I hate me.
I hate everybody but you.
He says, you love me?
I said, yes, I love you.
And I started to sob.
I mean the tension
just released,
and I could tell
him I loved him,
and I just loved him so much.
And tears started to
stream down his face.
Then he looked at
me and he said,
I told you to love everyone.
I said, yeah, but you
told me to tell the truth.
And the truth is I
don't love everyone.
And he came up to me nose to
nose, and eyeball to eyeball.
He says, Ram Dass, love
everyone and tell the truth.
What I saw in front
of me was a coffin.
And in the coffin was
who I thought I was.
I'm somebody who the truth
is, I don't love everyone.
I saw him saying
when you get finished
being who you think you
are, who you will be
is someone who loves everyone
and that's the truth.
You will rest in truth, which
is love where everyone is.
As long as you're busy
being somebody separate,
you're going to love
that one and not
love that one, because
you're going to be
caught discriminating mind.
Third Chinese patriarch
says the Great Way is not
difficult for those who
have no preferences.
When love and hate
are both absent,
everything becomes
clear and undisguised.
But make the
slightest distinction,
and heaven and earth are
set infinitely apart.
And I looked over at all
these people I hated.
And at that moment,
my heart was so open,
and I saw that behind what
I hated in each of them,
I loved them all incredibly.
And here were these
beautiful beings.
They were trying for the light.
They were reaching.
They were these
incredible souls.
I saw the innocence of each
of them behind the guile.
And then I saw that between
me and that expression
of that love, in the courtyard
I saw this huge mountain.
And the only word for
the mountain was pride.
Because Maharaji didn't
say, work it out with them.
He said, love them.
He didn't say, save face.
He just said, love them.
So then he sent me across
the courtyard to eat.
And then he called
all of them over.
And he said, go
touch Ram Dass' feet.
He's a great saint.
So they all came over and
touched my feet, one at a time.
And I hated them.
I mean that reawakened
the hatred of all of them.
Because I knew they
were hating, me and they
weren't really doing
it, and all that stuff.
So I saw my predicament
and I just thought,
well, I really ought to make
at least an effort, you know.
I'll try.
And my guru said it.
Why don't I do it?
So I had some apples
that he had thrown at me.
And I cut them up
into little pieces
and I decided to feed each
person a piece of apple.
But I knew, because
I had been trained
as a yogi, that to feed somebody
with anger in your heart
is like giving them poison.
And I cut up the apple, and I
went to feed it to each person.
And I would look at each person,
and I would feel the anger.
And the reason for my
anger, which was righteous,
of course I was right, always.
We all are, aren't you?
And I could see
where I loved them.
And I just would sit
with that whole thing
until I would just let go
of the hold of that anger,
without working it out,
without trying to save face,
without getting them to give a
little and me to give a little,
so we all end up--
I just gave up.
I just loved them.
It took me about
an hour and a half
to put an apple in everybody's
mouth, 30 people's mouths.
Now since that time,
I used to be so angry
all the time that Hari Dass
Baba, who used to say he
could never stay
in the room with me
for more than a few minutes,
because the anger would
make him sick, physically sick,
the repressed anger in me.
Since that time, I get
angry all the time.
But I let go much
faster, because I
see the anger as a
place where I got caught
with a model in my head
of how a person should be,
other than the way they are.
It's like you can look
at elms, oaks, and pines,
and pinions, and magnolias; and
you can say, look at that tree.
You don't say, I wish that
pine were a magnolia tree.
But you get to humans,
and you're continually
deciding how everybody
should be, other than the way
they are, instead
of appreciating
this is a perfect John, and
this is a perfect Helen.
This is a perfect Bill, perfect
Leonard, perfect example
of that species of neurosis.
[MUSIC PLAYING]